Project Gutenberg's Voyage to Jupiter, by David Morrison and Jane Samz

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of
the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the United States, you'll have
to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook.

Title: Voyage to Jupiter

Author: David Morrison
        Jane Samz

Release Date: February 19, 2019 [EBook #58915]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK VOYAGE TO JUPITER ***




Produced by Stephen Hutcheson and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net






    [Illustration: A special color reconstruction of the eruption of the
    volcano Loki on the Jovian satellite Io. The picture was taken by
    Voyager 1 from a range of about half a million kilometers.
    [P-21334C]]




                                                             NASA SP-439

    [Illustration: Voyage To Jupiter]




                           Voyage To Jupiter


                             David Morrison
                             and Jane Samz

    [Illustration: NASA]

          Scientific and Technical Information Branch    1980
             National Aeronautics and Space Administration
                                                          Washington, DC
  For sale by the Superintendent of Documents
  U.S. Government Printing Office, Washington, D.C. 20402
  Library of Congress Catalog Card Number 80-600126




                                FOREWORD


Few missions of planetary exploration have provided such rewards of
insight and surprise as the Voyager flybys of Jupiter. Those who were
fortunate enough to be with the science teams during those weeks will
long remember the experience; it was like being in the crow’s nest of a
ship during landfall and passage through an archipelago of strange
islands. We had known that Jupiter would be remarkable, for man had been
studying it for centuries, but we were far from prepared for the torrent
of new information that the Voyagers poured back to Earth.

Some of the spirit of excitement and connection is captured in this
volume. Its senior author was a member of the Imaging Team. It is not
common that a person can both “do science” at the leading edge and also
present so vivid an inside picture of a remarkable moment in the history
of space exploration.

  April 30, 1980
                                                         Thomas A. Mutch
                                                 Associate Administrator
                                                 Office of Space Science




                              INTRODUCTION


The two Voyager encounters with Jupiter were periods unparalleled in
degree and diversity of discovery. We had, of course, expected a number
of discoveries because we had never before been able to study in detail
the atmospheric motions on a planet that is a giant spinning sphere of
hydrogen and helium, nor had we ever observed planet-sized objects such
as the Jovian satellites Ganymede and Callisto, which are half
water-ice. We had never been so close to a Moon-sized satellite such as
Io, which was known to be dispersing sodium throughout its Jovian
neighborhood and was thought to be generating a one-million-ampere
electrical current that in some way results in billions of watts of
radio emission from Jupiter.

The closer Voyager came to Jupiter the more apparent it became that the
scientific richness of the Jovian system was going to greatly exceed
even our most optimistic expectations. The growing realization among
Voyager scientists of the wealth of discovery is apparent in their
comments, discussions, and reports as recounted by the authors in their
descriptions of the two encounters.

Although many of the discoveries occurred in the few weeks around each
encounter, they were, of course, the result of more than those few weeks
of effort. In fact, planning started a decade earlier, and the Voyager
team of engineers and scientists had been designing, building, and
planning for the encounters for seven years. The Pioneer spacecraft made
the first reconnaissance of Jupiter in 1973-1974, providing key
scientific results on which Voyager could build, and discoveries from
continuing ground-based observations suggested specific Voyager studies.
Voyager is itself just the second phase of exploration of the Jovian
system. It will be followed by the Galileo program, which will directly
probe Jupiter’s atmosphere and provide long-term observations of the
Jovian system from an orbiting spacecraft. In the meantime, the Voyager
spacecraft will continue their journey to Saturn, and possibly Uranus
and Neptune, planets even more remote from Earth and about which we know
even less than we knew of Jupiter before 1979.

As is clearly illustrated in this recounting of the voyage to Jupiter,
scientific endeavors are human endeavors; just as Galileo could not have
foreseen the advancement in our knowledge initiated by his discoveries
of the four Jovian moons in 1610, neither can we fully comprehend the
scientific heritage that our exploration of space is providing future
generations.

  April 1980
                                                         Edward C. Stone
                                               Voyager Project Scientist




                            ACKNOWLEDGEMENT


The authors are grateful to the many members of the Voyager Project team
who not only made this historic mission of exploration possible but also
took time from their busy schedules to offer us assistance, information,
and encouragement in the preparation of this book. Among many too
numerous to name individually, we particularly thank E. C. Stone, A. L.
Lane, C. H. Stembridge, R. A. Mills, E. Montoya, M. A. Mitz, and B. A.
Smith, L. Soderblom, and their colleagues on the Voyager Imaging Team.
We are grateful to F. E. Bristow, D. L. Bane, L. J. Pieri and especially
J. J. Van der Woude for their assistance in obtaining optimum versions
of the photographs printed here. C. B. Pilcher and I. de Pater kindly
made available their groundbased pictures of the Jovian magnetosphere.
Many colleagues have read and provided helpful comments on parts of the
manuscript, among them G. A. Briggs, S. A. Collins, S. Cruikshank, J.
Doughty, A. L. Guin, A. L. Lane, R. A. Mills, E. Montoya, E. C. Stone,
J. L. Ward, and especially C. R. Chapman.




                                CONTENTS


  Foreword                                                              v
  Introduction                                                        vii
  Acknowledgment                                                       ix
  Chapter 1. The Jovian System                                          1
  Chapter 2. Pioneers to Jupiter                                       11
  Chapter 3. The Voyager Mission                                       23
  Chapter 4. Science and Scientists                                    33
  Chapter 5. The Voyage to Jupiter—Getting There                       47
  Chapter 6. The First Encounter                                       63
  Chapter 7. The Second Encounter: More Surprises From the “Land” of
          the Giant                                                    93
  Chapter 8. Jupiter—King of the Planets                              117
  Chapter 9. Four New Worlds                                          139
  Chapter 10. Return to Jupiter                                       169
  Appendix A. Pictorial Maps of the Galilean Satellites               177
  Appendix B. Voyager Science Teams                                   195
  Appendix C. Voyager Management Team                                 197
  Additional Reading                                                  199

    [Illustration: Jupiter is the largest planet in the solar system—a
    gaseous world as large as 1300 Earths, marked by alternating bands
    of colored clouds and a dazzling complexity of storm systems. The
    Voyager mission gave us our first close look at this spectacular
    planet. [P-21085]]




                               CHAPTER 1
                           THE JOVIAN SYSTEM


                              Introduction

In the Sun’s necklace of planets, one gem far outshines the rest:
Jupiter. Larger than all the other planets and satellites combined,
Jupiter is a true giant. If intelligent beings exist on planets circling
nearby stars, it is probable that Jupiter is the only member of our
planetary system they can detect. They can see the Sun wobble in its
motion with a twelve-year period as Jupiter circles it, pulling first
one way, then the other with the powerful tug of its gravity. If
astronomers on some distant worlds put telescopes in orbit above their
atmospheres, they might even be able to detect the sunlight reflected
from Jupiter. But all the other planets—including tiny inconspicuous
Earth—would be hopelessly lost in the glare of our star, the Sun.

Jupiter is outstanding among planets not only for its size, but also for
its system of orbiting bodies. With fifteen known satellites, and
probably several more too small to have been detected, it forms a sort
of miniature solar system. If we could understand how the Jovian system
formed and evolved, we could unlock vital clues to the beginning and
ultimate fate of the entire solar system.

Ancient peoples all over the world recognized Jupiter as one of the
brightest wandering lights in their skies. Only Venus is brighter, but
Venus, always a morning or evening star, never rules over the dark
midnight skies as Jupiter often does. In Greek and Roman mythology the
planet was identified with the most powerful of the gods and lord of the
heavens—the Greek Zeus; the Roman Jupiter.

As befits the king of the heavens, the planet Jupiter moves at a slow
and stately pace. Twelve years are required for Jupiter to complete one
orbit around the Sun. For about six months of each year, Jupiter shines
down on us from the night sky, more brightly and steadily than any star.
During the late 1970s it was a winter object, but in 1980 it will
dominate the spring skies, becoming a summer “star” about 1982.


                           Early Discoveries

Even seen through a small telescope or pair of binoculars, Jupiter looks
like a real world, displaying a faintly banded disk quite unlike the
tiny, brilliant image of a star. It also reveals the brightest members
of its satellite family as starlike points spread out along a straight
line extended east-west through the planet. There are four of these
planet-sized moons; with their orbits seen edge-on from Earth, they seem
to move constantly back and forth, changing their configuration hourly.

In January 1610, in his first attempt to apply the newly invented
telescope to astronomy, Galileo discovered the four large satellites of
Jupiter. He correctly interpreted their motion as being that of objects
circling Jupiter—establishing the first clear proof of celestial motion
around a center other than the Earth. The discovery of these satellites
played an important role in supporting the Copernican revolution that
formed the basis for modern astronomy.

A few decades later the satellites of Jupiter were used to make the
first measurement of the speed of light. Observers following their
motions had learned that the satellite clock seemed to run slow when
Jupiter was far from Earth and to speed up when the two planets were
closer together. In 1675 the Danish astronomer Ole Roemer explained that
this change was due to the finite velocity of light: The satellites only
seemed to run slow at large distances because the light coming from them
took longer to reach Earth. Knowing the dimensions of the orbits of
Earth and Jupiter and the amount of the delay (about fifteen minutes),
Roemer was able to calculate one of the most fundamental constants of
the physical universe—the speed of light (about 300 000 kilometers per
second).

    [Illustration: Galileo’s notes summarizing his first observations of
    the Jovian satellites Io, Europa, Ganymede, and Callisto in January
    1610 were made on a piece of scratch paper containing the draft of a
    letter presenting a telescope to the Doge in Venice. These
    observations were the result of Galileo’s first attempt to apply the
    telescope to astronomical research.]

The four great moons of Jupiter are called the Galilean satellites after
their discoverer. Their individual names—Io, Europa, Ganymede, and
Callisto—were proposed by Simon Marius, a contemporary and rival of
Galileo. (Marius claimed to have discovered the satellites a few weeks
before Galileo did, but modern scholars tend to discredit his claim.)
Io, Europa, Ganymede, and Callisto are names of lovers of the god
Jupiter in Greco-Roman mythology. Since Jupiter was not at all shy about
taking lovers, there are enough such names for the other eleven Jovian
satellites, as well as for those yet to be discovered.

In the century following Galileo’s death, improvements in telescopes
made it possible to measure the size of Jupiter and to note that it
bulged at the equator. The equatorial diameter is known today to be 142
800 kilometers, while from pole to pole Jupiter measures only 133 500
kilometers. For comparison, the diameter of the Earth is 12 900
kilometers, only about one-tenth as great, and the flattening of Earth
is also much smaller (less than one percent). By measuring the orbits of
the satellites and applying the laws of planetary motion discovered by
Johannes Kepler and Isaac Newton, astronomers were also able to
determine the total mass of Jupiter—about 2 × 10²⁴ tons, or 318 times
the mass of the Earth.

Once the size and mass are known, it is possible to calculate another
fundamental property of a planet—its density. The density, which is the
mass divided by the volume, provides important clues to the composition
and interior structure of a planetary body. The density of Earth, a body
composed primarily of rocky and metallic materials, is 5.6 times the
density of water. The mass of Jupiter is 318 times that of Earth; its
volume is 1317 times that of Earth. Thus Jupiter’s density is
substantially lower than Earth’s, amounting to 1.34 times the density of
water. From this low density, it was evident long ago that Jupiter was
not just a big brother of Earth and the other rocky planets in the inner
solar system. Rather, Jupiter is the prototype of the giant, gas-rich
planets Jupiter, Saturn, Uranus, and Neptune. These giant planets must,
from their low density, have a composition fundamentally different from
that of Mercury, Venus, Earth, Moon, and Mars.
